doolittle post indexing
2013-11-03
doolittle

Time to think through post indexing a bit. Current situation:

_Posts are indexed only by filename, out-of-order, no additional metadata, into one file. Encrypted posts are decrypted with a single passphrase._

Here's what I'd like:

* Keep one-post-per-file. It is convenient for authoring and makes post permalinks simple to deliver.
* Let me paginate posts.
* Let me list all posts by title and date, in-order, without loading every post.
* Let me list all sections that exist without loading all posts to discover those sections.
* Let me have multiple passwords and partition posts into different encrypted sets.
* Keep all encrypted post metadata hidden until unlocked. 

Let's tackle these one by one.

* **Paginating posts**: All we need for this is to have posts in the index in-order. Then we don't have to load all posts before getting them in the right order.
* **List all posts by title & date**: We need to store title & date in the index.
* **List all sections that exist**: We need section in the index.
* **Support multiple passwords**: Need to partition posts and have the encryption/decryption routines aware of the partitions. Need password entry to have a way of specifying which partition it targets.
* **Keep encrypted post metadata hidden**: Keep separate post indexes for each partition of encrypted posts, encrypted with same passphrase as corresponding posts.

Let's set a few restrictions that will make this easier:

* All posts must belong to one-and-only-one section.
* An entire section can optionally be encrypted by a single passphrase. Separate passphrases must be used for separate sections. One passphrase could unlock multiple sections.

How do we tackle discovering which section is being targeted by a given passphrase? A couple options:

* Explicitely reference the section while entering the passphrase. This could be in a separate field, or it could be embedded in the passphrase (format could be SECTION.passphrase).
* An entered passphrase could be attempted against everything and the ones that work are displayed.

The latter sounds nice because it is simple -- only enter the passphrase -- and because it supports multiple sections getting unlocked with a single passphrase.

How about an indexing schema like this:

```json
{
  openSections: {
    "General": [
      {title: "Some post", date: "2013-11-03", file: "2013-11-03_some_post.md"},
      {title: "Another post", date: "2013-11-01", file: "anotherpost.md"}],
    "Section Foo": [
      {title: "Bar", date: "2013-11-02", file: "foo/bar.md"}]
  },
  lockedSections: [
    "fooEnc",
    "barEnc"
  ]
}
```

When the page is loaded we parse this index and populate the sidebar with all known sections, and can even list posts count or most recent post date if we want. All post titles can be shown. We can support pagination. 

For the locked sections, we can test an entered passphrase against each entry in that array. If we get valid section JSON back, we remove the entry from lockedSections and place it into openSections. This way you can enter multiple passphrases in and unlock everything if you wish.

Post format can remain the same:

* Arbitrary filenames and directory structure.
* Line 1 = title, line 2 = date, line 3 = section, two newlines, followed by the post body.

One question remains, how do you communicate that a section should be encrypted? Currently we just use the extension `.c.md`. We also have an awkward encrypt/decrypt model that allows for inconsistency and makes it a pain to create a new encrypted post. Let's solve all this. Some ideas:

* Have a file "encrypted_sections" that lists all sections that should be encrypted. Don't want to do this because it exposes the section names.
* Continue using a file extension to communicate intent to encrypt. Don't like this because of the possibility of using the file extension for some posts in a section, but not others.
* Stick instruction to encrypt inside the file. Same issue with not doing this consistently. Also no easy way to turn off encryption for an entire section with lots of posts.
* Use a special folder. Only issue is if there are section name collisions. 

Special folder sounds great for a few reasons. Want to encrypt a post? Just move it to the encrypted_posts folder. Want a post to be public? Just move it out to the normal posts directory. No additional instruction needed in the file, no special file extension, intent is very clear. Only potential issue is section name collisions. If we just merge decrypted posts into the existing section that solves that. 

Now we'll have two folders, posts/ and posts_enc/. Two issues remain:

* What's the lifecycle of creating and updating a post look like? Should be easy, and should make publishing the plaintext file very unlikely.
* Can we hide the filenames of encrypted posts?

How about a third folder, posts_dec/.  This contains decrypted posts, that should be encypted. Crystal clear what not to commit to your repo, and it makes it easy to warn the user when we're running indexing and give the option of deleting. If we already have encrypted a post in a given section, and then create a new post for that section, and for some reason encrypt it with a new passphrase, that is OK because we can still decrypt both separately and our section merge operation will make them both accessible. If you decrypt everything, then run indexing, you will only be allowed to choose a single passphrase for that section. For filenames, we can just md5 the post file to generate a filename for use in posts_enc/.

What command line utilities do we need now? I think just two:

1. Build index. This will check for any files in posts_dec/, group by section, and prompt for a passphrase for each section and do the encryption, then prompt the user to delete the plaintext copies.
2. Decrypt. This will let the user supply as many passphrases as they like to incrementally decrypt as many of the encrypted posts as they like, using the same method as is used client-side. 

So, what remains to build this:

1. Create posts_enc and posts_dec folders. 
2. Update `blog.rb` to run indexing by default, and support a decrypt argument. Remove the encrypt argument and just make this part of indexing.
3. Make indexing generate the new format. Parse everything in posts_dec and prompt for passphrases for each section, encrypt all posts, generate filenames with md5, stick them in posts_enc, prompt to delete them at end.
4. Build decrypt function in `blog.rb`
5. Update blog.js to handle parse new format.

Let's do it!
